Nigeria, like the rest of the world, is dealing with a lot of problems. However, beyond all these problems, there are efforts to respond to them. Solutions Journalism aims to tell these stories of how people are  responding to different social problems. The aim is to empower others experiencing similar problems with information on how they are being addressed. Solutions Journalism adopts a solutions-oriented approach to storytelling; telling rigorous, investigative, and compelling stories of responses to existing social problems. The insights from these stories can help scale up the responses or replicate them in other places. It differs from the traditional, often problem-focused journalism because it highlights what works, as opposed to what does not, and goes further to investigate why an intervention or solution to a social problem was able to bring change. Solutions Journalism also looks at what could have been done differently to improve or solve similar problems in other places. It can be used as an effective tool to hold the powerful accountable by showing them how others are solving problems, thereby removing excuses. As part of our Solutions Journalism Africa Initiative project supported by the Solutions Journalism Network, we work with Newsrooms and individuals to spread the practice of solutions journalism in Nigeria. We train them to understand why solutions journalism matters and support them to produce these stories. We are currently  working with 10 newsrooms across Nigeria and will be onboarding 10 fellows as part of the initiative. Like Journalists from the newsrooms, the fellows will be trained to understand how to produce solutions stories and supported to produce their own over the period of the fellowship (11 months). What will you get? Who we are looking for How to apply Schedule July 19  – Open call for applications July 28 – Solutions Journalism info session webinar August 31 – Application close by 5pm September 20th – Feedback to applicants October 2021 – July 2022 – Fellowship period (onboarding, orientation, training, working on proposed projects)